[CONTENT] Newsletter 104 - April/May news (#126)
reactos/web-content: content/blogs/newsletter-104.md

With that said, the ReactOS Team is pleased to announce the addition of 4 new developers for the project -- Carl J. Bialorucki (cbialorucki), Doug Lyons (Doug-Lyons), Oleg Dubinskiy (oleg-dubinskiy) and Whindmar Saksit (whindsaks).
Their main focus is to maintain the Shell and Audio components, as well as on any other module that requires assistance.

## Symmetric Multiprocessing (SMP) support status & GCC 13 preparations
Symmetric multiprocessing support for the AMD64 architecture is being extensively improved thanks to Timo Kreuzer (tkreuzer).
In particular, he has implemented support for processor freezing and switching ([PR #6581](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6581)) so that every logical processor is frozen or switched properly.
In addition, he implemented basic support for IPIs (inter-processor interrupts) which are needed for SMP scheduling, debugging, and more ([PR #6130](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6130)).

> Where APC and DPC are used the first time their meanings should be included in parenthesis similar to the way IPI was done above.

Reviewer: This was not intended to be inserted verbatim, but to be a comment only. Suggested change from:
"Where APC and DPC are used the first time their meanings should be included in parenthesis similar to the way IPI was done above."
to:
"These are only limited to APC (Asynchronous Procedure Calls), DPC (Deferred Procedure Calls) and freeze IPIs for the time being."
(comment here, not to be included: Sorry for the confusion. Doug Lyons)

As you may know; ReactOS shares many components in user mode with WINE, although our shell is in many cases an exception to this the bulk of the usermode DLLs that provide APIs to applications are synced with the WINE project as base.

ReactOS for many years have fallen short on updating these components as WINE has pushed further into the modern era.
Updating these components means we greatly improve the stability and functionality of the components we sync, but also lets us look into the future as more NT6+ features and functionality get merged into the project.

Some early experiments have shown dramatically improved application compatibility on the very early builds that come enabled with these features by default.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/python.png" src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/python.png" caption="Running Python on ReactOS (this is used to run the Winesync python script)">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

The aim of this effort is to bring the improvements and fixes from WINE that help with the support of NT6+ software that otherwise wouldn't have worked.
This also helps getting rid of hacks introduced.

## Asynchronous network connection support

> TODO

Reviewer 2: Regarding async network patch, it's being worked on in [PR #6349](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6349) . I've 
added async connect support for `WSPConnect` function in MSAFD (patch originally made by Peter Hater), fixed IOCTL buffers handling and fixed the leaks in MSAFD code. Now the code was working fine for web browsers without crashing or web lookup issue. However, the implementation still relies on `SleepEx` hacks (for APCs) and the performance still not as fast as Windows. I'll find a better solution for MSAFD APCs handling in the future PRs.

But, as it was tested with BRD Demo app, looping a single header works properly as it should.

Besides that, his future plan is to further improve the audio stack with more fixes.
He plans to fix the DirectSound `IKsPropertySet` implementation, which allows apps like VirtualDJ 8.2 and Microsoft DirectX Diagnostic Tool to properly detect the sound card and display audio device information.
These fixes and more are coming soon!

## New ATA storage driver bringup
ReactOS uses the [UniATA](https://alter.org.ua/en/soft/win/uni_ata) driver to support ATA/SATA and various IDE controllers.
It is the backbone of the ATA infrastructure in ReactOS as well as the sole open source Windows/ReactOS kernel mode ATA driver.

While UniATA still serves as the main crucial module for ATA implementation support, it is not in perfect shape.
It suffers from bugs and issues that prevents some hardware from working properly.
Fixing these bugs requires a rewrite of large parts of the UniATA source code.

Dmitry Borisov (disean) aims to fix this problem by implementing a new PnP-aware ATA driver for PATA and AHCI devices ([PR #6577](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6577)).

> While his work is still underway, once it is completed the new ATA driver will bring better system stability as well as squash all the existing bugs that are present in the UniATA driver.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While his work is still underway, once it is completed the new ATA driver will bring better system stability as well as squash many of the existing bugs that are present in the UniATA driver.
```

---
title:       "Newsletter 104 - April/May news"
author:      "GeoB99"
date:        2024-04-22
tags:        [ newsletter ]
---

Greetings from the ReactOS Team!
This year, we will start with a short summary highlighting ongoing work on the project as well as announcing the selection of our brand new developers.
We will also talk about the current situation with symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) support in ReactOS.

## Development team enlargement
Over the last decade, the number of people in the project team base has not changed much.
While development continued and still continues as usual, the development team hadn't seen any increase in new developers.
In fact, some of the existing core developers became inactive some time ago and some of these were maintainers of important core modules of the project.

This left the development workflow in a state of paralysis for some of the components of ReactOS, as nobody else in the team had the right skills to determine the correctness of the patches provided by contributors in order to get them shipped in the [master](https://github.com/reactos/reactos) branch.

> The ReactOS Team is currently adopting an approach to circumvent this problem, by enrolling contributors into the development team who have contributed useful patches for at least a year, have good coding skills, have collaborated with project team members and are willing to work in the area in which they are interested.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The ReactOS Team is currently adopting an approach to circumvent this problem by enrolling contributors into the development team, who have contributed useful patches for at least a year, have good coding skills, have collaborated with project team members and are willing to work in the area in which they are interested.
```

Author: Sorry but no, I would rather follow Carl's suggestion instead.

> The ReactOS Team is currently adopting an approach to circumvent this problem, by enrolling contributors into the development team who have contributed useful patches for at least a year, have good coding skills, have collaborated with project team members and are willing to work in the area in which they are interested.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ReactOS Team is currently adopting an approach to circumvent this problem: by enrolling contributors into the development team who have contributed useful patches for at least a year, have good coding skills, have collaborated with project team members and are willing to work in the area in which they are interested.
```

> With that said, the ReactOS Team is pleased to announce the addition of 4 new developers for the project -- Carl J. Bialorucki (cbialorucki), Doug Lyons (Doug-Lyons), Oleg Dubinskiy (oleg-dubinskiy) and Whindmar Saksit (whindsaks).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With that said, the ReactOS Team is pleased to announce the addition of 4 new developers for the project: Carl J. Bialorucki (cbialorucki), Doug Lyons (Doug-Lyons), Oleg Dubinskiy (oleg-dubinskiy) and Whindmar Saksit (whindsaks).
```

## Symmetric Multiprocessing (SMP) support status & GCC 13 preparations
Symmetric multiprocessing support for the AMD64 architecture is being extensively improved thanks to Timo Kreuzer (tkreuzer).
In particular, he has implemented support for processor freezing and switching ([PR #6581](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6581)) so that every logical processor is frozen or switched properly.
In addition, he implemented basic support for IPIs (inter-processor interrupts) which are needed for SMP scheduling, debugging, and more ([PR #6130](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6130)).
These are only limited to APC (Asynchronous Procedure Calls), DPC (Deferred Procedure Calls) and freeze IPIs for the time being.

Another important improvement for SMP is the kernel initialization in the AMD64 build architecture, which was revamped by Timo ([PR #6110](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6110)).
This allows SMP to work properly.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/blender_smp.png" src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/blender_smp.png" caption="Blender running in ReactOS 64-bit with 2 cores">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

> After preliminary investigations by jackson2k2 and Simone Mario Lombardo (simonelombardo) for making ReactOS compileable and bootable on GCC 13, Timo tackled the bugs to be able to complete and compile ReactOS in the GCC 13 build environment ([PR #6824](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6824)).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After preliminary investigations by Jackson Bryn (jackson2k2) and Simone Mario Lombardo (simonelombardo) for making ReactOS compileable and bootable on GCC 13, Timo tackled the bugs to be able to complete and compile ReactOS in the GCC 13 build environment ([PR #6824](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6824)).
```

This is a necessary step in order to upgrade the GCC environment toolchain of the builder carrier in the future.

> In the meantime, Justin Miller (The_DarkFire) is focusing on the x86 architecture of the SMP area.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the meantime, Justin Miller (The_DarkFire) is focusing on SMP support for the x86 architecture.
```

He worked on setting up application processor bootup ([PR #5879](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/5879)) in x86 SMP HAL and is planning to further improve x86 SMP.
On top of all of this, experiments have begun to allow ReactOS to make use of the new SMP aware HAL.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/smp_x86.png" src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/smp_x86.png" caption="Experimenting the 32-bit SMP build of ReactOS">}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/smp_cpuz.png" src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/smp_cpuz.png" caption="ReactOS SMP 32-bit showing the benchmark results with CPU-Z">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

**It is worth noting that SMP is still heavily under development and there is no exact estimate of when the multi-core support will finally be ready, so stay tuned for more updates!**

## User-mode WINE modules syncing
Timo, Justin and several other contributors are making efforts to bring up-to-date some of the user-mode modules that we borrow from WINE.

> As you may know, ReactOS shares many components in user mode with WINE, although our shell is in many cases an exception to this, the bulk of the usermode DLLs that provide APIs to applications are synced with the WINE project as their base.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As you may know, ReactOS shares many components in user mode with WINE. Although our shell is in many cases an exception to this, the bulk of the usermode DLLs that provide APIs to applications are synced with the WINE project as their base.
```

ReactOS has fallen short for many years on updating these components as WINE has pushed further into the modern era.
Updating these components means we greatly improve the stability and functionality of the components we sync, but also lets us look into the future as more NT6+ features and functionality get merged into the project.

Some early experiments have shown dramatically improved application compatibility on the very early builds that come enabled with these features by default.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/python.png" src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/python.png" caption="Running Python 3.7 on ReactOS (this is used to run the Winesync python script)">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

The aim of this effort is to bring the improvements and fixes from WINE that help with the support of NT6+ software that otherwise wouldn't have worked.

> This also helps getting rid of hacks introduced.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This also helps us remove older hacks that are no longer needed.
```

## Asynchronous network connection support

> ReactOS supports basic networking provided by the Sockets Provider API (MSAFD), that is, applications that require an Internet connection can perform networking operations in a blocking way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ReactOS supports basic networking provided by the Sockets Provider API (MSAFD). This API requires applications to perform networking operations in a blocking way.
```

> This means that the connection is done between peer-to-peer synchronously, which has limitations on its own.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This means that the connection is done between peer-to-peer synchronously, which has many limitations.
```

> This means that the connection is done between peer-to-peer synchronously, which has many limitations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This means that any network connection activity is performed synchronously, which has many limitations.
```

Nowadays modern applications perform network operations asynchronously (aka non-blocking way) which ReactOS currently does not support.

This leads to undefined behaviors and bugs with certain network related API function calls such as `WSPConnect` that do not work properly when required to estabilish a network connection of a socket

> to a peer and such in non-blocking (asynchronous) way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to a peer and such in a non-blocking (asynchronous) way.
```

Thamatip Chitpong (TAN-Gaming) aims to fix this problem by taking the lead on working on an implementation for asynchronous networking support ([PR #6349](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6349)).
During his development he also fixed other miscellaneous bugs and issues related to the MSAFD component.

This greatly improves the network reliability of applications such as web browsers, FTP file transfers, multi-player games and whatnot.
Although the performance is not on par with Windows yet, Thamatip has future plans to tackle this and other problems not currently handled by his PR.

## Audio improvements
Several major improvements in audio subsystem have been made by Oleg Dubinskiy recently.
In [PR #6686](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6686), he implemented handling modern audio formats (e.g. Extensible audio, Float audio, and others). He also implemented support for high sample rates, setting bits per sample sound quality, and more than two (stereo) output channels.

{{< video src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/ros_extensible_format.mp4" type="video/mp4" caption="Testing the extensible audio format of some apps">}}

> This allows many 3rd-party programs and games (e.g. AIMP 5.30, QMMP 0.12.17, all Chromium based browsers, and the Game Dev Tycoon) which are using modern formats, to open an audio device and play sounds correctly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This allows many 3rd-party programs and games, including AIMP 5.30, QMMP 0.12.17, all Chromium based browsers, and Game Dev Tycoon, to open an audio device and play sounds correctly.
```

> However, the sound only works when the audio miniport driver (e. g. Intel AC97, Realtek HD Audio etc.) supports the requested format directly.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, the sound only works when the audio miniport driver (e.g. Intel AC97, Realtek HD Audio, etc.) supports the requested format directly.
```

> Otherwise it won't work, because playing a format which is not supported by the driver requires resampling support, which is currently not finished; so this feature is disabled in ReactOS for now.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Otherwise it doesn't work, because playing such format would require resampling support, which is currently not finished; so this feature is disabled in ReactOS for now.
```

Reviewer 3: Won't (will not) is better here than doesn't (does not). Also, it should be "such a format..." not "such format"

Reviewer 4: Alright, but "will not" sounds like "never" for me, which is not the case, because "until resampling implemented".

He also added support for looped wave playback ([PR #6761](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6761)).
Looped playback functionality allows audio data to be played multiple times (in other words, played in a loop).
The audio data to stream is contained in wave headers (each portion of it is in its own `WAVEHDR` structure).

{{< video src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/BRD_test.mp4" type="video/mp4" caption="Testing the looped wave playback in action">}}

In Windows, this is supported by `WHDR_BEGINLOOP` and `WHDR_ENDLOOP` flags together with specifying the amount of loops to play the audio data in `WAVEHDR.dwLoops` member.

> As a single wave header, same multiple headers can be looped there.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Both single wave headers and multiple wave headers can be looped using these flags and members.
```

Oleg has implemented only looping a single wave header, while looping two or more wave headers is not supported yet.
However we have no testcase for the second case yet, because Oleg did not find any apps that requested to loop multiple headers.
But, as it was tested with BRD Demo app, looping a single header works properly as it should.

Besides that, his future plan is to further improve the audio stack with more fixes.

> For example, he plans to implement the `GetWavePosition` API, which retrieves the current wave playback position in time, and is required by many apps to play sound correctly.

Reviewer 4: GetWavePosition got committed today.

He also plans to fix the DirectSound `IKsPropertySet` implementation, which allows apps like VirtualDJ 8.2 and Microsoft DirectX Diagnostic Tool to properly detect the sound card and display audio device information.
These fixes and more are coming soon!

## New ATA storage driver bringup
ReactOS uses the [UniATA](https://alter.org.ua/en/soft/win/uni_ata) driver to support ATA/SATA and various IDE controllers.
It is the backbone of the ATA infrastructure in ReactOS as well as the sole open source Windows/ReactOS kernel mode ATA driver.

> While UniATA still serves as the main crucial module for ATA implementation support, it is not in a perfect shape.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While UniATA still serves as the main crucial module for ATA implementation support, it is not in perfect shape.
```

It suffers from bugs and issues that prevents some hardware from working properly.

> Fixing some of these bugs requires a rewrite of large parts of the UniATA source code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Fixing these bugs requires a rewrite of large parts of the UniATA source code.
```

Dmitry Borisov (disean) aims to fix this problem by implementing a new PnP-aware ATA driver for PATA and AHCI devices ([PR #6577](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6577)).

> While his work is still underway, once it is completed the new ATA driver will bring more system stability as well as squash all the existing bugs that were present with the UniATA driver.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While his work is still underway, once it is completed the new ATA driver will bring better system stability as well as squash all the existing bugs that were present with the UniATA driver.
```

> While his work is still underway, once it is completed the new ATA driver will bring better system stability as well as squash all the existing bugs that were present with the UniATA driver.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While his work is still underway, once it is completed the new ATA driver will bring better system stability as well as squash all the existing bugs that are present in the UniATA driver.
```

---
title:       "Newsletter 104 - April/May news"
author:      "GeoB99"
date:        2024-04-22
tags:        [ newsletter ]
---

Greetings from the ReactOS Team!
This year, we will start with a short summary highlighting ongoing work on the project as well as announcing the selection of our brand new developers.
We will also talk about the current situation with symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) support in ReactOS.

## Development team enlargement
Over the last decade, the number of people in the project team base has not changed much.
While development continued and still continues as usual, the development team hadn't seen any increase in new developers.

> In fact, some of the existing core developers became inactive for quite a while, some of whom were maintainers of important core modules of the project.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
In fact, some of the existing core developers became inactive some time ago and some of these were maintainers of important core modules of the project.

This left the development workflow in a state of paralysis for some of the module components of ReactOS, as nobody else in the team had the right skills to determine the correctness of the patches provided
by contributors in order to get them shipped in the [master](https://github.com/reactos/reactos) branch.
The ReactOS Team is currently adopting an approach to circumvent this problem, by enrolling contributors into the development team who have contributed useful patches for at least a year, have good coding skills, have collaborated with project team members and are willing to work in the area in which they are interested.

With that said, the ReactOS Team is pleased to announce the addition of 4 new developers for the project -- Carl J. Bialorucki (cbialorucki), Doug Lyons (Doug-Lyons), Oleg Dubinskiy (oleg-dubinskiy) and Whindmar Saksit (whindsaks).

> Their main focus is to maintain the Shell and Audio components, as well as on any other module that requires assistance.

Reviewer 5: This sentence isn't really true and probably more confusing than helpful.

These are only limited to APC (Asynchronous Procedure Calls), DPC (Deferred Procedure Calls) and freeze IPIs for the time being.

Another important improvement for SMP is the kernel initialization in the AMD64 build architecture, which was revamped by Timo ([PR #6110](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6110)).
This allows SMP to work properly.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/blender_smp.png" src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/blender_smp.png" caption="Blender running in ReactOS 64-bit with 2 cores">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

Timo also helped fix some bugs to be able to compile ReactOS in the GCC 13 build environment ([PR #6824](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6824)).
Much of the thanks for preparing ReactOS to build on GCC 13 goes to Simone Mario Lombardo (simonelombardo) for making ReactOS bootable.

In the meantime, Justin Miller (The_DarkFire) is focusing on the x86 architecture of the SMP area.
He worked on setting up application processor bootup ([PR #5879](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/5879)) in x86 SMP HAL and is planning to further improve x86 SMP.

> On top of all of this experiments have begun to allow ReactOS to make use of the new SMP aware HAL.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
On top of all of this, experiments have begun to allow ReactOS to make use of the new SMP aware HAL.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/smp_x86.png" src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/smp_x86.png" caption="Experimenting the 32-bit SMP build of ReactOS">}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/smp_cpuz.png" src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/smp_cpuz.png" caption="ReactOS SMP 32-bit showing the benchmark results with CPU-Z">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

**It is worth noting that SMP is still heavily under development and there is no exact estimate of when the multi-core support will finally be ready, so stay tuned for more updates!**

## User-mode WINE modules syncing
Timo, Justin and several other contributors are making efforts to bring up-to-date some of the user-mode modules that we borrow from WINE.

> As you may know; ReactOS shares many components in user mode with WINE, although our shell is in many cases an exception to this the bulk of the usermode DLLs that provide APIs to applications are synced with the WINE project as base.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
As you may know, ReactOS shares many components in user mode with WINE, although our shell is in many cases an exception to this, the bulk of the usermode DLLs that provide APIs to applications are synced with the WINE project as their base.

ReactOS for many years have fallen short on updating these components as WINE has pushed further into the modern era.

> Updating these components means we greatly improve the stability and functionality of the components we sync, but also lets us look into the future as more NT6+ features and functionality get merged into the project.

Reviewer 5: "NT6+ features and functionality" is plural.

Some early experiments have shown dramatically improved application compatibility on the very early builds that come enabled with these features by default.

{{< gallery >}}

> {{< figure link="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/python.png" src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/python.png" caption="Running Python on ReactOS (this is used to run the Winesync python script)">}}

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/python.png" src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/python.png" caption="Running Python 3.7 on ReactOS (this is used to run the Winesync python script)">}}
```

{{< /gallery >}}

The aim of this effort is to bring the improvements and fixes from WINE that help with the support of NT6+ software that otherwise wouldn't have worked.
This also helps getting rid of hacks introduced.

## Asynchronous network connection support
ReactOS supports basic networking provided by the Sockets Provider API (MSAFD), that is, applications that require an Internet connection can perform networking operations in a blocking way.
This means that the connection is done between peer-to-peer synchronously, which has limitations on its own.

> Nowadays modern applications perform network operations asynchronously (aka non-blocking way) of which ReactOS currently does not support that.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Nowadays modern applications perform network operations asynchronously (aka non-blocking way) which ReactOS currently does not support.
```

Thamatip Chitpong (TAN-Gaming) aims to fix this problem by taking the lead on working on an implementation for asynchronous networking support ([PR #6349](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6349)).
During his development he also fixed other miscellaneous bugs and issues related to the MSAFD component.

This greatly improves the network reliability of applications such as web browsers, FTP file transfers, multi-player games and whatnot.
Although the performance is not on par with Windows yet, Thamatip has future plans to tackle this and other problems not currently handled by his PR.

## Audio improvements
Several major improvements in audio subsystem have been made by Oleg Dubinskiy recently.
In [PR #6686](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6686), he implemented handling modern audio formats (e.g. Extensible audio, Float audio, and others). He also implemented support for high sample rates, setting bits per sample sound quality, and more than two (stereo) output channels.

{{< video src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/ros_extensible_format.mp4" type="video/mp4" caption="Testing the extensible audio format of some apps">}}

> This allows many 3rd-party programs and games (e.g. AIMP 5.30, QMMP 0.12.17, all Chromium based browsers, and the GameDevTycoon game) which are using modern formats, to open an audio device and play sounds correctly.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This allows many 3rd-party programs and games (e.g. AIMP 5.30, QMMP 0.12.17, all Chromium based browsers, and Game Dev Tycoon) which are using modern formats, to open an audio device and play sounds correctly.
```

This left the development workflow in a state of paralysis for some of the module components of ReactOS, as nobody else in the team had the right skills to determine the correctness of the patches provided
by contributors in order to get them shipped in [master](https://github.com/reactos/reactos) branch.
The ReactOS Team is currently adopting an approach to circumvent this problem, by enrolling contributors to the development team who are known to have contributed with useful patches for at least a year, have enough coding skills, have collaborated with the project team members and are willing to work on the main field of area they are interested in.

With that said, the ReactOS Team is pleased to announce the upcoming of 4 new developers for the project -- Carl J. Bialorucki (cbialorucki), Doug Lyons (Doug-Lyons), Oleg Dubinskiy (oleg-dubinskiy) and Whindmar Saksit (whindsaks). Their main focus is to maintain the Shell and Audio components respectively, as well as on any module that requires assistance.

# Symmetric Multiprocessing (SMP) support status
TODO

## User-mode WINE modules syncing
TODO

## Audio improvements

> TODO

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Several major improvements in audio subsystem have been made by Oleg Dubinskiy recently. In particular, he implemented handling modern audio formats (e.g., Extensible audio, Float audio and others) [6686](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6686), which support high sample rates, bits per sample sound quality and more than two (stereo) output channels. This allows many 3rd-party programs and games (e.g., AIMP 5.30, QMMP 0.12.17, all Chromium based browsers and GameDevTycoon game) which are using modern formats, to open an audio device and play the sound properly. However, for now the sound is usually working when the audio miniport driver (e. g., Intel AC97, Realtek HD Audio etc.) supports the requested format directly. Otherwise, it won't work, because playing the format which is not supported by driver needs resampling support, which is currently not finished, so is disabled for now in ReactOS by default.
Another improvement he made, is a support for looped wave playback [6761](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6761). Looped playback functionality allows to play some audio data multiple times (in other words, play it in loop). The audio data to stream is contained in wave headers (each portion of it is in its own `WAVEHDR` structure). In Windows, this is supported by `WHDR_BEGINLOOP` and `WHDR_ENDLOOP` flags together with specifying the amount of loops to play the audio data in `WAVEHDR.dwLoops` member. As a single wave header, same multiple headers can be looped there. Oleg has implemented only looping a single wave header, while looping two or more wave headers is not supported yet. However we have no any testcase for the second case yet, because Oleg did not find any apps those request to loop multiple headers. But, as it was tested with BRD Demo app, looping a single header works properly as it should.
Besides that, he is also working on some another audio improvements (not in the tree yet). For example, `GetWavePosition` API implementation, which retrieves the current wave playback position in time, and is required by many apps to work correctly too. Another improvement some portion of fixes in DirectSound `IKsPropertySet` implementation, which allows to properly detect sound card by VirtualDJ 8.2, same as it's used by Microsoft DirectX Diagnostic Tool as well, and allows to display more information by audio device there. These and more fixes are coming soon! ;)
```
Note this is not the final version, it can be improved still, if needed.

Reviewer 9: Also, as an addendum, maybe it makes sense to insert my last two videos from YouTube and Twitter in the notes, but I don't know how to add them as playable videos, not as just links to the videos.
https://youtu.be/3fNFANlDj3c?si=SdDifN3emmkkXrJC
https://twitter.com/i/status/1783576020907372910

Reviewer 9: Done. Sent them you in PM.

---
title:       "Newsletter 104 - April/May news"
author:      "GeoB99"
date:        2024-04-22
tags:        [ newsletter ]
---

Greetings from the ReactOS Team!
In this year we will start with a short summary highlighting the current people's works on the project as well as announcing the selection of new fresh developers.

> In this report we will also talk about the current situation with the symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) support in ReactOS.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
We will also talk about the current situation with the symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) support in ReactOS.
```

## Development team enlargement
In the early years of this decade the project team base remained for the most part stagnant.
While the development continued and still continues as usual, the development team hadn't seen any enlargement with potential developers.
In worst cases some of the existing core developers became inactive for quite a while, of which were maintainers of important core modules of the project.

This left the development workflow in a state of paralysis for some of the module components of ReactOS, as nobody else in the team had the right skills to determine the correctness of the patches provided
by contributors in order to get them shipped in [master](https://github.com/reactos/reactos) branch.
The ReactOS Team is currently adopting an approach to circumvent this problem, by enrolling contributors to the development team who are known to have contributed with useful patches for at least a year, have enough coding skills, have collaborated with the project team members and are willing to work on the main field of area they are interested in.

> With that said, the ReactOS Team is pleased to announce the upcoming of 4 new developers for the project -- Carl J. Bialorucki (cbialorucki), Doug Lyons (Doug-Lyons), Oleg Dubinskiy (oleg-dubinskiy) and Whindmar Saksit (whindsaks). Their main focus is to maintain the Shell and Audio components respectively, as well as on any module that requires assistance.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
With that said, the ReactOS Team is pleased to announce the upcoming of 4 new developers for the project -- Carl J. Bialorucki (cbialorucki), Doug Lyons (Doug-Lyons), Oleg Dubinskiy (oleg-dubinskiy) and Whindmar Saksit (whindsaks).
Their main focus is to maintain the Shell and Audio components respectively, as well as on any module that requires assistance.
```

## User-mode WINE modules syncing
Timo, Justin other contributors are making an effort to bring up up-to-date some of the user-mode modules that we borrow from WINE.
Specifically the components that we do share with WINE are KERNEL32, COMCTL32, USER32 and others of which were left in an obsolete state.

The aim of this effort is to bring the improvements and fixes from WINE that help with the support of NT6+ software that otherwise wouldn't have worked.
This also helps getting rid of hacks introduced.

## Audio improvements
Several major improvements in audio subsystem have been made by Oleg Dubinskiy recently.
In particular, he implemented handling modern audio formats (e.g., Extensible audio, Float audio and others), [PR #6686](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6686), which support high sample rates, bits per sample sound quality and more than two (stereo) output channels.

{{< video src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/ros_extensible_format.mp4" type="video/mp4" caption="Testing the extensible audio format of some apps">}}

> This allows many 3rd-party programs and games (e.g., AIMP 5.30, QMMP 0.12.17, all Chromium based browsers and GameDevTycoon game) which are using modern formats, to open an audio device and play the sound properly. However, for now the sound is usually working when the audio miniport driver (e. g., Intel AC97, Realtek HD Audio etc.) supports the requested format directly.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
This allows many 3rd-party programs and games (e.g., AIMP 5.30, QMMP 0.12.17, all Chromium based browsers and GameDevTycoon game) which are using modern formats, to open an audio device and play the sound properly.
However, for now the sound is usually working when the audio miniport driver (e. g., Intel AC97, Realtek HD Audio etc.) supports the requested format directly.
```

Otherwise, it won't work, because playing the format which is not supported by driver needs resampling support, which is currently not finished, so is disabled for now in ReactOS by default.

Another improvement he made, is a support for looped wave playback ([PR #6761](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6761)).

> Looped playback functionality allows to play some audio data multiple times (in other words, play it in loop). The audio data to stream is contained in wave headers (each portion of it is in its own `WAVEHDR` structure).

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
Looped playback functionality allows to play some audio data multiple times (in other words, play it in loop).
The audio data to stream is contained in wave headers (each portion of it is in its own `WAVEHDR` structure).
```

{{< video src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/BRD_test.mp4" type="video/mp4" caption="Testing the looped wave playback in action">}}

> In Windows, this is supported by `WHDR_BEGINLOOP` and `WHDR_ENDLOOP` flags together with specifying the amount of loops to play the audio data in `WAVEHDR.dwLoops` member. As a single wave header, same multiple headers can be looped there. Oleg has implemented only looping a single wave header, while looping two or more wave headers is not supported yet. However we have no any testcase for the second case yet, because Oleg did not find any apps those request to loop multiple headers. But, as it was tested with BRD Demo app, looping a single header works properly as it should.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
In Windows, this is supported by `WHDR_BEGINLOOP` and `WHDR_ENDLOOP` flags together with specifying the amount of loops to play the audio data in `WAVEHDR.dwLoops` member.
As a single wave header, same multiple headers can be looped there.
Oleg has implemented only looping a single wave header, while looping two or more wave headers is not supported yet.
However we have no testcase for the second case yet, because Oleg did not find any apps those request to loop multiple headers.
But, as it was tested with BRD Demo app, looping a single header works properly as it should.
```

> Besides that, he is also working on some another audio improvements (not in the tree yet). For example, `GetWavePosition` API implementation, which retrieves the current wave playback position in time, and is required by many apps to play the sound correctly too. Another improvement is a some portion of fixes in DirectSound `IKsPropertySet` implementation, which allows to properly detect sound card by VirtualDJ 8.2, same as it's used by Microsoft DirectX Diagnostic Tool as well, and allows to display more information by audio device there. These and more fixes are coming soon!

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
Besides that, he is also working on some another audio improvements (not in the tree yet).
For example, `GetWavePosition` API implementation, which retrieves the current wave playback position in time, and is required by many apps to play the sound correctly too.
Another improvement is a some portion of fixes in DirectSound `IKsPropertySet` implementation, which allows to properly detect sound card by VirtualDJ 8.2, same as it's used by Microsoft DirectX Diagnostic Tool as well, and allows to display more information by audio device there. These and more fixes are coming soon!
```

Should we announce things not in tree yet?
I don't think we usually do this.

Reviewer 9: But why can't we? Maybe it's also a good idea, moreover if these thing will be added in tree soon.

Author: The input was coming from @oleg-dubinskiy and he said his report isn't finished yet. Perhaps changing `Besides that, he is also working on some another audio improvements (not in the tree yet).` to something like `His future plan is to further improve the audio stack with more fixes` or the like would probably make sense.

Reviewer 9: Yeah, seems such a rephrasing sounds better in this case.

## New ATA storage driver bringup

> ReactOS uses the [UniATA](https://alter.org.ua/en/soft/win/uni_ata) driver to support ATA/SATA and various IDE controllers. It is the backbone of the ATA infrastructure in ReactOS as well as the sole open source
> Windows/ReactOS kernel mode ATA driver.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
ReactOS uses the [UniATA](https://alter.org.ua/en/soft/win/uni_ata) driver to support ATA/SATA and various IDE controllers.
It is the backbone of the ATA infrastructure in ReactOS as well as the sole open source Windows/ReactOS kernel mode ATA driver.
```

While UniATA has and still serves as the main crucial module for ATA implementation support, it is not in a perfect shape.

> It suffers from bugs and issues that prevent some hardware from properly working. In worst cases some of these bugs require a huge rewrite of most of the UniATA source code.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
It suffers from bugs and issues that prevent some hardware from properly working.
Some of these bugs require a huge rewrite of large parts of the UniATA source code.
```

With that said, the ReactOS Team is pleased to announce the upcoming of 4 new developers for the project -- Carl J. Bialorucki (cbialorucki), Doug Lyons (Doug-Lyons), Oleg Dubinskiy (oleg-dubinskiy) and Whindmar Saksit (whindsaks).
Their main focus is to maintain the Shell and Audio components respectively, as well as on any module that requires assistance.

## Symmetric Multiprocessing (SMP) x64 support status & GCC 13 preparations
Timo Kreuzer (tkreuzer) and Justin Miller (The_DarkFire) are working extensively on the multi-core SMP support on ReactOS.
Timo implemented the support for processor switching and freeze in AMD64 build architecture ([PR #6686](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6686)) and clock IPI handler ([PR #6686](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6686)).

Justin worked on application processor bootup ([PR #5879](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/5879)) which allows every present processor to be started.

## User-mode WINE modules syncing

> Timo, Justin other contributors are making an effort to bring up up-to-date some of the user-mode modules that we borrow from WINE.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Timo, Justin, and other contributors are making an effort to bring up up-to-date some of the user-mode modules that we borrow from WINE.
```
Fixed a typo.

---
title:       "Newsletter 104 - April/May news"
author:      "GeoB99"
date:        2024-04-22
tags:        [ newsletter ]
---

Greetings from the ReactOS Team!

> In this year we will start with a short summary highlighting the current people's works on the project as well as announcing the selection of new fresh developers.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
This year, we will start with a short summary highlighting ongoing work on the project as well as announcing the selection of our brand new developers.

We will also talk about the current situation with the symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) support in ReactOS.

## Development team enlargement
In the early years of this decade the project team base remained for the most part stagnant.
While the development continued and still continues as usual, the development team hadn't seen any enlargement with potential developers.

> In worst cases some of the existing core developers became inactive for quite a while, of which were maintainers of important core modules of the project.

Reviewer: Siggestion:
In fact, some of the existing core developers became inactive for quite a while, some of whom were maintainers of important core modules of the project.

This left the development workflow in a state of paralysis for some of the module components of ReactOS, as nobody else in the team had the right skills to determine the correctness of the patches provided
by contributors in order to get them shipped in [master](https://github.com/reactos/reactos) branch.

> The ReactOS Team is currently adopting an approach to circumvent this problem, by enrolling contributors to the development team who are known to have contributed with useful patches for at least a year, have enough coding skills, have collaborated with the project team members and are willing to work on the main field of area they are interested in.

Reviewer: Change:
and are willing to work in the area they are interested in.
To:
and are willing to work in the area in which they are interested.
"A preposition is a bad thing to end a sentence with." (Quote by DL, not a suggested change.)

With that said, the ReactOS Team is pleased to announce the upcoming of 4 new developers for the project -- Carl J. Bialorucki (cbialorucki), Doug Lyons (Doug-Lyons), Oleg Dubinskiy (oleg-dubinskiy) and Whindmar Saksit (whindsaks).
Their main focus is to maintain the Shell and Audio components respectively, as well as on any module that requires assistance.

## Symmetric Multiprocessing (SMP) support status & GCC 13 preparations
The symmetric multiprocessing support for AMD64 architecture is getting extensively improved thanks to Timo Kreuzer (tkreuzer).
In particular, he has implemented code for processor freezing and switching ([PR #6581](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6581)) so that every logical processor is frozen or switched properly.
In addition he implemented basic support for IPIs (interprocessor interrupts) which are needed for SMP scheduling, debugging and whatnot ([PR #6130](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6130)).

> These are only limited to APC, DPC and freeze IPIs for the moment being.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
Where APC and DPC are used the first time their meanings should be included in parenthesis similar to the way IPI was done above.

Another important improvement in the area of SMP is the kernel initialization in the AMD64 build architecture, which got refurbished by Timo ([PR #6110](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6110)).

> This allows the SMP support to work properly.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This allows the SMP support to work properly.

![image (5)](https://github.com/reactos/web-content/assets/23200630/841f9077-f0bd-4199-9ba9-60d90e28a789)

```

Timo also helped fixing some bugs in order to get ReactOS compile-able for GCC 13 build environment.
Most of the chunk of GCC 13 preparations goes thanks to Simone Mario Lombardo (simonelombardo) for making ReactOS bootable.

In the meantime Justin Miller (The_DarkFire) is focusing on the x86 architecture of the SMP area.

> He worked on the preparations for the application processor bootup ([PR #5879](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/5879)) in x86 SMP HAL and is planning to further improve the x86 part of SMP.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
He worked on the preparations for the application processor bootup ([PR #5879](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/5879)) in x86 SMP HAL and is planning to further improve the x86 part of SMP.

![image (4)](https://github.com/reactos/web-content/assets/23200630/729dbce3-71d5-4b22-9cbf-99ac29f25078)
```

> **It is worth noting that SMP is still heavily under development and there is no exact estimation when will the multicore support finally come out as ready, so stay tuned for more updates!**

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
![IMG_4862](https://github.com/reactos/web-content/assets/23200630/7118dc0d-5975-4db5-a9b2-bafa8baa3db0)

**It is worth noting that SMP is still heavily under development and there is no exact estimation when will the multicore support finally come out as ready, so stay tuned for more updates!**
```

Reviewer: Suggested Change of:
"no exact estimation when will the multicore support finally out as ready,"
To:
"no exact estimate of when the multi-core support will finally be ready,"

> **It is worth noting that SMP is still heavily under development and there is no exact estimation when will the multicore support finally come out as ready, so stay tuned for more updates!**

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
On top of all of this experiments have begun to allow ReactOS to make use of the new SMP aware HAL.
**It is worth noting that SMP is still heavily under development and there is no exact estimation when will the multicore support finally come out as ready, so stay tuned for more updates!**
```

## User-mode WINE modules syncing

> Timo, Justin and other contributors are making an effort to bring up up-to-date some of the user-mode modules that we borrow from WINE.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Timo, Justin and several other contributors are making an effort to bring up up-to-date some of the user-mode modules that we borrow from WINE.
```

> Specifically the components that we do share with WINE are KERNEL32, COMCTL32, USER32 and others of which were left in an obsolete state.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Specifically the components that we do share with WINE are KERNEL32, COMCTL32, USER32 and others of which were left in an obsolete state.

![image (3)](https://github.com/reactos/web-content/assets/23200630/470d9f46-0cbf-4f83-8baa-63d1deeed685) 
```

Reviewer 4: I'd recommend attaching the pics into PR to not rely on GitHub CDN.

> Specifically the components that we do share with WINE are KERNEL32, COMCTL32, USER32 and others of which were left in an obsolete state.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

As you may know; ReactOS shares many components in user mode with WINE, although our shell is in many cases an exception to this the bulk of the usermode DLLs that provide APIs to applications are synced with the WINE project as base. ReactOS for many years have fallen short on updating these components as WINE has pushed further into the modern era. Updating these components means we greatly improve the stability and functionality of the components we sync, but also lets us look into the future as more NT6+ features and functionality get merged into the project. Some early experiments have shown improved application compatibility on the very early builds that come enabled with these features by default. 
```

The aim of this effort is to bring the improvements and fixes from WINE that help with the support of NT6+ software that otherwise wouldn't have worked.
This also helps getting rid of hacks introduced.

## Audio improvements
Several major improvements in audio subsystem have been made by Oleg Dubinskiy recently.

> In particular, he implemented handling modern audio formats (e.g., Extensible audio, Float audio and others), [PR #6686](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6686), which support high sample rates, bits per sample sound quality and more than two (stereo) output channels.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In particular, he implemented handling modern audio formats (e.g. Extensible audio, Float audio, and others), [PR #6686](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6686), which support high sample rates, bits per sample sound quality and more than two (stereo) output channels.
```

Reviewer 4: Review comment has been marked as addressed, but it's not... there should not be a comma right after the "e.g."

Author: Then next time I advise everyone to not review the very same thing which only confuses and overwhelms me when addressing reviews. Literally there's like 3 reviews with mixed up suggestions for the exact same thing... that's not helpful.

Reviewer 4: It's hard for reviewer to track review comments of other reviewers.

> In particular, he implemented handling modern audio formats (e.g., Extensible audio, Float audio and others), [PR #6686](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6686), which support high sample rates, bits per sample sound quality and more than two (stereo) output channels.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In [PR #6686](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6686), he implemented handling modern audio formats (e.g., Extensible audio, Float audio, and others). He also implemented support for high sample rates, setting bits per sample sound quality, and more than two (stereo) output channels.
```

{{< video src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/ros_extensible_format.mp4" type="video/mp4" caption="Testing the extensible audio format of some apps">}}

> This allows many 3rd-party programs and games (e.g., AIMP 5.30, QMMP 0.12.17, all Chromium based browsers and GameDevTycoon game) which are using modern formats, to open an audio device and play the sound properly.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This allows many 3rd-party programs and games (e.g. AIMP 5.30, QMMP 0.12.17, all Chromium based browsers, and GameDevTycoon game) which are using modern formats, to open an audio device and play the sound properly.
```

> This allows many 3rd-party programs and games (e.g., AIMP 5.30, QMMP 0.12.17, all Chromium based browsers and GameDevTycoon game) which are using modern formats, to open an audio device and play the sound properly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This allows many 3rd-party programs and games (e.g., AIMP 5.30, QMMP 0.12.17, all Chromium based browsers, and the GameDevTycoon game) which are using modern formats, to open an audio device and play sounds correctly.
```

> However, for now the sound is usually working when the audio miniport driver (e. g., Intel AC97, Realtek HD Audio etc.) supports the requested format directly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, the sound only works when the audio miniport driver (e. g., Intel AC97, Realtek HD Audio etc.) supports the requested format directly.
```

> Otherwise, it won't work, because playing the format which is not supported by driver needs resampling support, which is currently not finished, so is disabled for now in ReactOS by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Otherwise it won't work, because playing a format which is not supported by the driver requires resampling support, which is currently not finished; so this feature is disabled in ReactOS for now.
```

> Another improvement he made, is a support for looped wave playback ([PR #6761](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6761)).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Another improvement he made, is support for looped wave playback ([PR #6761](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6761)).
```

> Another improvement he made, is a support for looped wave playback ([PR #6761](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6761)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
He also added support for looped wave playback ([PR #6761](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6761)).
```

> Looped playback functionality allows to play some audio data multiple times (in other words, play it in loop).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Looped playback functionality allows audio data to be played multiple times (in other words, played in a loop).
```

The audio data to stream is contained in wave headers (each portion of it is in its own `WAVEHDR` structure).

{{< video src="/img/blogs/newsletter-104/BRD_test.mp4" type="video/mp4" caption="Testing the looped wave playback in action">}}

In Windows, this is supported by `WHDR_BEGINLOOP` and `WHDR_ENDLOOP` flags together with specifying the amount of loops to play the audio data in `WAVEHDR.dwLoops` member.
As a single wave header, same multiple headers can be looped there.
Oleg has implemented only looping a single wave header, while looping two or more wave headers is not supported yet.

> However we have no any testcase for the second case yet, because Oleg did not find any apps those request to loop multiple headers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However we have no testcase for the second case yet, because Oleg did not find any apps that requested to loop multiple headers.
```

But, as it was tested with BRD Demo app, looping a single header works properly as it should.

Besides that, his future plan is to further improve the audio stack with more fixes.

> For example, `GetWavePosition` API implementation, which retrieves the current wave playback position in time, and is required by many apps to play the sound correctly too.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, he plans to implement the `GetWavePosition` API, which retrieves the current wave playback position in time, and is required by many apps to play sound correctly.
```

> Another improvement is a some portion of fixes in DirectSound `IKsPropertySet` implementation, which allows to properly detect sound card by VirtualDJ 8.2, same as it's used by Microsoft DirectX Diagnostic Tool as well, and allows to display more information by audio device there.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
He also plans to fix the DirectSound `IKsPropertySet` implementation, which allows apps like VirtualDJ 8.2 and Microsoft DirectX Diagnostic Tool to properly detect the sound card and display audio device information.
```

> These and more fixes are coming soon!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These fixes and more are coming soon!
```

## New ATA storage driver bringup
ReactOS uses the [UniATA](https://alter.org.ua/en/soft/win/uni_ata) driver to support ATA/SATA and various IDE controllers.
It is the backbone of the ATA infrastructure in ReactOS as well as the sole open source Windows/ReactOS kernel mode ATA driver.

> While UniATA has and still serves as the main crucial module for ATA implementation support, it is not in a perfect shape.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While UniATA was and still serves as the main crucial module for ATA implementation support, it is not in a perfect shape.
```

Reviewer 4: Alternatively:
```suggestion
While UniATA still serves as the main crucial module for ATA implementation support, it is not in a perfect shape.
```

> It suffers from bugs and issues that prevent some hardware from properly working.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It suffers from bugs and issues that prevents some hardware from working properly.
```

> Some of these bugs require a huge rewrite of large parts of the UniATA source code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Fixing some of these bugs requires a rewrite of large parts of the UniATA source code.
```

Dmitry Borisov (disean) aims to fix this problem by implementing a new PnP-aware ATA driver for PATA and AHCI devices ([PR #6577](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/6577)).

> While his work is still WIP, once it is completed the new ATA driver will bring more system stability as well as squash all the existing bugs that were present with the UniATA driver.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While his work is still underway, once it is completed the new ATA driver will bring more system stability as well as squash all the existing bugs that were present with the UniATA driver.
```

> Stay tuned for more updates!

Reviewer 4: (experimental suggestion)
```suggestion
-----

Stay tuned for more updates!
```
